---
title: Amazon Cloud Player vs. Google Play
layout: post
date: 2013-03-14 12:13
comments: true
categories: 
---
Perhaps you've heard of Amazon's new Cloud Player and Google Play (previously 
Google Music), and perhaps you've used one or both of them. If you've already 
formed your own opinion, it's unlikely that what I will say here will change 
it, but if you're considering trying one of these (admittedly awesome) 
services, you may enjoy reading on.~~MORE~~

As you can see from the simple feature grid below, the services are very 
similar on their face:

| Feature                | Cloud Player          | Google Play              |
|------------------------+-----------------------+--------------------------|
| Upload your own music  | Up to 250 tracks free | Up to 20,000 tracks free |
| Match online library   | Yes                   | Yes                      |
| Play in web browser    | Yes                   | Yes                      |
| Play on Android/iPhone | Yes                   | Yes                      |
| Play on Sonos speakers | Yes                   | No                       |
| Download tracks        | Yes                   | Yes                      |
| Upload automatically   | Yes                   | Yes                      |

So let's get into the details. First things first: why would you want to use 
one of these services anyway? I'm sure that the reasons may be different for 
you, but here are the reasons I decided to start this evaluation:

* Listen to the same music on your computer, from your phone, and through a 
  variety of other media devices, such as Sonos and Roku (the Netflix player).
* Have download access to your music from anywhere (with a browser).

For me, the first point is doubly attractive because I have an ample data plan 
from my cell carrier and Bluetooth A2DP audio in my car. This means that I can 
listen to all of my music in the car, on the train, on my computer at home, or 
on my laptop in a coffee shop somewhere. It's a compelling proposition.

My entire music collection at this point is about 7,000 tracks. The truth is, 
I don't frequently listen to all of that music, but I think that 7,000 tracks 
is a reasonable size for a personal music collection. I was on the cusp of 
purchasing the Amazon Cloud Player "premium account," which increases the 
track limit to 250,000, when I learned of the Google Play service.

With Google Play's 20,000 track limit, I can load up all of my music and 
listen for free. Awesome.

OK, so the feature grid makes it look like the services are equivalent except 
for the track limit, so how do you choose? I'm here to tell you, they are 
*not* equivalent at all.

## Browser support

The first thing you're going to notice is that both services offer 
browser-based players. The full desktop browser players are OK from both 
companies, but Google edges out the lead by accepting some common keyboard 
shortcuts, such as spacebar to play and pause, and left and right arrow keys 
to move to the previous and next track.

The Amazon player works well enough and the interface is easy to use, but it 
doesn't seem to respond to any key presses.

Now let's talk about mobile browsers. Both services offer native apps for the 
iPhone and Android-based phones, but what they do not offer is a native iPad 
app. So, what if you want to listen to some music on your iPad?

If you have Cloud Player, you can't. You can install the iPhone app on your 
iPad, but it's not a great experience. If you're really in a bind and want to 
go that route, it's there, but it is not a very "iPaddy" experience.

I got the Amazon Cloud Player site to load in Mobile Safari on my iPad once, 
and it even played a track or two, but it was unreliable and took several taps 
of links and buttons to make things happen. Now it looks like you get turned 
away when you try to access it from the iPad so I guess it's really not 
production-ready.

If you try to load the Google Play site on your iPad browser (and just to be 
generous, I used Chrome, which I normally use for web browsing on my iPad 
anyway), it loads fine, and works perfectly. The interface is spartan 
considering the screen real estate, but the playback works exactly as you 
would expect it to.

I don't think that you can listen to music in the background while using the 
browser-based app, but at least it works.

## Other ways to listen

Google owns the web experience; between the two web-based players, Google's is 
the more intuitive, more responsive, and generally cleaner one.

On the iPhone, both services seem to be neck-and-neck. On Android (which is 
what I personally use), the Google Play app is a nice little player that can 
stream from your account as well as play local music. I have used it for a 
while and have no substantial complaints.

It seems that Google is not ready or not willing to allow third-party 
developers to access the music from Play, though. Sonos can't play from that 
source, and I don't think you can access it from your Roku, either. Meanwhile, 
Amazon's Cloud Player service is accessible from both Roku and Sonos.

## On the periphery

A few other things stand out that you may like to consider when choosing a 
service:

* Amazon's music uploader application is made with Adobe Air. I don't have any 
  real problem with Adobe Air, but Amazon didn't do a great job with this one. 
  It can sometimes hang while uploading and doesn't feel very polished.
* In contrast to the above, Google's music uploader is a native application. I 
  tried the Windows one and the experience was smooth and without issue.
* It seemed to me that Google's service provided a faster upload speed. I am 
  on Verizon FiOS and have 35 megabits of upstream bandwidth so I do like to 
  see a couple of megs per second going up, and with Google that was the case.

## Conclusion

Which service to choose? This depends on your needs, of course. If you want to 
do a serious test drive without spending any money, Google will let you store 
more tracks for free. If you are a devout user of Sonos, Roku, or another 
third-party multimedia platform, the chances are higher than it will have 
Cloud Player support than Google Play support.

If you are an Android user, or if you listen mostly on the web at work or at 
home, Google's service is the way to go; their web-based player is on par with 
Pandora and other mature web applications, with support for keyboard shortcuts 
and a quick, responsive feel.

For me, I think I will stick with Google Play. It's a bummer that I can't play 
it on the Sonos, but maybe that will change. For now, I'm happy to stream from 
my browser and my phone.
