---
layout: post
title: "Impostor Syndrome and Why I Skim Resumes"
---

I've been making a living writing software for the Internet since 1999. I've
also had the privilege of interviewing perhaps a hundred candidates for various
software engineering roles (maybe more; I don't really count).

First of all, a piece of advice: interview people. Don't do it alone the first
couple of times---hopefully your employer won't even let you, if you never have
before---but get in there and see what it's like from the other side of the
table.

I've learned a lot by participating in the interview process. One thing I
learned is that I'm probably a better software engineer than I think I
am. Another thing I've learned is that a degree in computer science, no matter
how prestigious, is not a reliable predictor of programming skill.

The entire hiring process in the field of software engineering is a stunning
demonstration of the "Dunning-Kruger effect." ~~MORE~~

The *Dunning-Kruger effect* was proposed in 1999 by David Dunning and Justin
Kruger, then of the Department of Psychology at Cornell University. They found
through a series of experiments that it is quite common for unskilled
individuals to *overestimate* their abilities, and conversely for skilled
individuals to *underestimate* their competence.

This effect is essentially a combination of two cognitive biases that psychology
has known about for a long time: *illusory superiority* and *impostor syndrome*.

It would be pretty unfair of me to say that everyone with a degree in computer
science suffers from a crippling case of illusory superiority, but what I will
say is that undergoing years of study in the field of computer science certainly
gives a person an *expectation* that they can perform at an above average level
in a programming interview. Such an impression is understandable given that
these candidates have often shelled out upwards of $100,000 for those degrees.

Unfortunately for those candidates, there are two facts standing in their way:

1. Unlike the Lake Wobegon of Garrison Keillor's *A Prairie Home Companion*,
   everyone can't be above average. Because that's how averages work. The
   majority of programming candidates have CS degrees and therefore, as dictated
   by the forces of nature, their skill levels can be expressed as a log normal
   distribution (a "bell curve," if you want).
2. Computer science curricula, with few exceptions, doesn't teach everything
   that I require from a software engineering candidate.

The first issue, which is that of the skill level distribution curve extending
further to one side or the other of candidates' own skill levels than they
perceive, is not a big problem for me, as an interviewer. Confidence is
important, and if you come off as a little bit arrogant, I can live with it if
you can do the job. My advice here is to be confident, but modest.

The second issue is a larger one. I want engineering candidates who can write
straightforward algorithms and design systems with appropriate levels of
abstraction, decoupling, modularity, and so on; but more importantly I want
candidates who are enthusiastic about the idea of working on a huge codebase
with three hundred other people, about diving into problems they don't know how
to solve... And solving them.

I also want engineering candidates who, quite frankly, aren't going to piss off
every other human being in their general vicinity. There is a soft skills aspect
to working in a very large and highly collaborative group. I don't expect
everyone to be a master of social skills (I'm certainly not one), but "soft
skills" are important in some measure.

The point being: passion for building, solving, learning, and understanding are
not usually things that computer science courses can, or even should, teach.

I ask all of my candidates how they stay up-to-date with the constantly and
rapidly evolving world of programming, especially web programming. A
revolutionary new Javascript framework is released every Tuesday; how do you
know what's going on and how other people feel about it? If you aren't reading
some tech blogs or news aggregators on a regular basis, how can you convince me
that you even care about what you're asking to be paid to do for 40+ hours a
week?
