---
layout: post
title: "Macs at Home, Android on the Go"
date: 2015-07-29T17:28:24-04:00
---

I bought my first Apple computer in 2002. It was a Power Mac G4 and it cost me
more money than I am willing to admit. OS X had been out for about two years
and, thanks to my experience running a Linux desktop exclusively for a few years
prior, I immediately fell in love.

In the years since, I've owned two "professional" Apple towers, a Mac Mini,
three or four Mac laptops, and a pretty extensive array of Apple TVs, iPods,
iPads, AirPorts, and so on. I'm writing this on a Mac right now.

Oh yes, and I've owned iPhones---two of them.

So why do I love Android with clawing, sweating desperation, and why am I now on
my fourth Android phone? And how do I sleep at night knowing that the ghost of
Steve Jobs is most certainly haunting me as he does all of those disloyal to his
empire? Because Android is a better operating system for nerds. ~~MORE~~

I can read your mind. _Better for nerds? What does that even mean?_ Simply, if
you're a person who enjoys the process of tailoring and trimming the tools and
devices in your life to be absolutely perfect, and who will willingly, if not
enthusiastically, climb steep learning curves to get things _just right_,
Android is the operating system for you.

Let me break it down into a list, because what modern blog post would be
complete without a list?

1. Android is (mostly) open source. I'll explain the benefits of this momentarily.
2. For developers, there is a great SDK. It's about as polished as the iOS SDK
   at this point.
3. There are no restrictions on installing and running _unsigned_ software.
4. Jailbreaking is for losers.

Let's go one by one.

## Android Is (Mostly) Open Source ##

The Android operating system itself is open source. Google has increasingly
moved its own resources into the ambiguous "Google Play Services" application,
which is closed-source and has special privileges, which has been a cause for
some contention among the software freedom advocates of the world, but since the
majority of the OS remains in the public view, it is still possible for
individuals to create derivative versions.

Among those are the very popular "Cyanogenmod," which is the flavor that ships
with the OnePlus One handset as well as the various and sundry (and to my mind,
mostly gross) carrier-specific Android distributions. There is only one version
of iOS; take it or leave it.

Why do you care? Because competition, no matter how tethered to Google's
ecosystem they may be required to be, is good for the consumer. Moreover, if you
are quite intrepid and have a phone that can be unlocked (such as the official
Nexus handsets), you can run any of a vast number of Android derivatives. I,
myself, ran AOKP (Android Open Kang Project) for over a year and loved many of
its unique features.

Choice is good.

## Solid SDK ##

This is not really a differentiating factor between Android and iOS since mobile
platforms are only as successful as their app ecosystems, which makes a polished
and easy-to-use SDK par for the course. Nevertheless, it bears mentioning that
since Android dropped their customized Eclipse environment in favor of an
equally tweaked IntelliJ front-end, the Android development experience is a lot
closer to the fit and finish of Apple's X Code Tools.

If you want to develop your own apps and tools, Android should be no less
welcoming than iOS.

## Unsigned Applications ##

For those of us who do want to build something ourselves, this is a powerful
feature. Though Apple's impetus for requiring encryption keys and licensing fees
is largely security-driven, which I can understand, you can develop an app for
Android and put it on your phone *today* for zero dollars.

Apple requires a $99 ransom for a developer certificate to allow your (probably
unfinished) software to run on your own physical device. Sure, the iOS emulator
that comes for free with X Code Tools is really swell, but if you are just a guy
who wants to build a tool or app for his own use (I'm a guy like that), you
still have to toss about a hundred bucks into Steve Jobs' donation plate for the
privilege of running it on _your own phone_. Even if you never try to sell it,
or even give it away.

Moreover, you can only install and run other software similarly blessed with a
proper certificate for which its author paid a crisp, electronic Benjamin. What
does this mean for you, the common nerd? Well...

1. Someone who had to shell out a hundred bucks to be able to let anyone else
   run their software probably thinks it has at least *some* value, and is more
   likely to ask *you* for cash to download it, or put some shitty pay gates
   inside of it. We live in the age of the freemium model.
2. You can't install software from outside of the App Store unless you jailbreak
   your phone. More on this later.

## Jailbreaking Is For Losers ##

If you need to do courageous and potentially dangerous things to your own
devices in order to be able to use them in the way you see fit, something is
wrong.

This applies to both platforms, of course, since most carriers nowadays ship
their Android phones with sophisticated bootloader locks that prevent you from
making changes to the system, but Google continues to maintain the line of Nexus
phones that are guaranteed to be unlockable. It's as easy as booting into a
special start-up menu and choosing "unlock my shit."
