---
layout: post
title: "Programming Without a Degree"
---

Programming is one of the few highly technical fields where a degree is, quite
frankly, unnecessary. Useful, perhaps; of significant value, maybe; but
necessary, no.

Let's not confuse "programming" with "computer science." Programming is teaching
a computer how to do something whereas computer science is a more abstract
exploration of computers and how they work. As a trite example, programming is
making a website that sells, let's say, furniture, and computer science is
developing neural networks that can recognize objects in photographs.

Computer science fuels the innovation that makes productive programming
possible, but programming is all you need to know to get paid to work with
computers.

So what good is a degree, anyway?~~MORE~~

I've interviewed hundreds of programmers. Some of them have had degrees, others
have not. Anecdotally, I can find practically no correlation between a
candidate's performance in an interview and what type of degree they
hold. Further, several of my most esteemed colleagues have liberal arts degrees
(as I do).

So why bother to get a computer science degree in the first place? I believe
that there are three reasons:

1. To be exposed to the full breadth of the history and application of
   computing, and even quite a bit of its depth (though it is now too vast to
   each everyone everything),

2. To overcome the arcane recruiting filters put in place by a majority of
   employers screening the overwhelming deluge of entry-level candidates you're
   competing against, and finally, in some cases,

3. To qualify for a more prestigious tier of H1-B visa sponsorship with
   significantly less competition from other immigrants.
   
If I've left out a significant reason here, drop a comment at the bottom.

What I find really interesting about the landscape of *programming training*,
which is what I want to focus on here, rather than academic computer science, is
that of the reasons above, only one is technical in nature. The second and third
reasons are purely political or tactical; you need a degree to differentiate
yourself as a candidate, but whether you remember any of the content or even
learned anything at all is immaterial for those purposes.

To my mind, there are only two compelling technical reasons to achieve a degree
in computer science:

1. You are not an effective autodidact; you require instruction, tutelage,
   guidance, etc.
   
2. You would like to enter a computing discipline that requires a great deal of
   specialized skill that would be challenging if not impossible to acquire on
   your own.

Now, if you were to ask Stephen Wolfram, he might reject #2 as a myth, having
essentially taught himself enough mathematics and physics at a young age to
publish proofs. But we are not all Stephen Wolfram, and so I would say that if
you wish to work in the fields of data science, artificial intelligence, etc.,
you are well-served to seek out an academic institution to fast-track your
training.

Similarly, I question whether college or university is a necessity for someone
who lacks the organization or focus to learn on their own. Surely there are less
expensive options in the form of online training, technical academies, and so
forth. If you are lucky enough to have a state-sponsored college with a decent
computer science program, maybe that's a good option.

I've spent a lot of time essentially *bashing* university computer science
programs. So what value, if any, is delivered by such a program?

CURIOSITY, TINKERER MINDSET, CREATIVITY
